Random Castle Dungeons: In the Darkest Pits...

d6 The dungeon is located...

In a tower set apart from the main castle.

Beneath the keep.

In a flanking tower of the castle.

Beneath flanking tower in the castle.

In a corner tower of the castle.

Beneath the corner tower.

d4 The dungeon was built...

As part of the original castle.

As a later addition.

For another purpose originally.

Long before most of the castle.

d8 The dungeon is...

A sprawling maze of twisting passages.

A sprawling maze of narrow passages.

Organized into small, neat rows of cells or pits.

Organized around a large central cell block or pit.

Only a few rooms.

An endless series of long corridors.

An endless series of small rooms and staircases.

A series of corridors with very low ceilings.

d10 Prisoners are held within...

Individual cells, in complete isolation.

Individual cells, but they can see and hear other prisoners.

Individual cells, but they can hear other prisoners.

Cells that accommodate up to two prisoners.

Cells that accommodate up to two prisoners, each shackled to the wall.

Cells that accommodate up to four prisoners.

Cells that accommodate up to four prisoners, each shackled to the wall.

A large chamber with many other prisoners, each shackled to the wall.

Individual pits or wells, open at the top.

One or more huge pit with many other prisoners.

d4 The cells’ (or pits’) condition is...

Well-maintained; the walls are solid.

Aging, but sturdy; the walls have some cracks.

Decrepit; the walls are crumbling.

So dark it’s difficult to say.

d4 Prisoners are treated...

Humanely; they receive reasonable meals, some exercise, and healing when needed.

Like dogs; they receive poor quality meals and enough healing to keep them alive.

Like rats; they receive terrible meals and are plagued by sickness.

Like they don’t exist; occasionally they receive food.

d10 The dungeon is known for...

Many prisoners dying in a terrible plague.

A mass escape in the past.

The escape of a famous criminal.

Being the final home of a famous criminal.

Being the final home of a legendary hero.

Being haunted by vengeful ghosts.

Its horrific torture pits.

Never suffering a successful escape.

Its quirky jailer.

The quality of its meals.

d8 According to rumor, within the castle’s dungeon lies...

A secret tunnel to the outside.

The bones of a long-lost hero.

The preserved head of an ancient villain.

A terrible beast to which prisoners are fed.

A missing lord or lady.

A famous jewel by a notorious prisoner.

A unique and terrible torture device.

The bones of a deposed king or queen.

d10 Rooms: This chamber is...

A dungeon cell.

Another dungeon cell.

A passageway connecting cell blocks.

A guardroom.

The barracks.

The jailer’s quarters.

A yard or large indoor space for exercise.

A small dining room.

An interrogation room.

A torture chamber.

d20 Features: You notice...

A wooden door reinforced with steel bands.

Steel bars where you expected a stone wall.

Empty manacles along the wall.

An empty sconce to hold a torch.

Distant torchlight.

The floor is uneven.

A crack in the stone floor.

A mouse skittering underfoot.

The stench of rotting flesh.

The scent of stale urine.

A putrid smell.

A dank and moldy odor.

An uncomfortable groaning.

A faint scratching sound.

An odd tapping sound.

The squeaking of rats.

The shouting of distant voices.

Howls of agony.

Horrific screams.

The clanking of chains.

d12 Escape Encounters: You come upon...

A snoozing guard or jailer.

A pair of guards on patrol.

A quartet of guards playing cards or dice on their break.

A pack of trained hunting dogs commanded by a high-ranking guard who has been alerted of the escape attempt.

An inquisitor on-site to interrogate another prisoner about an unrelated case.

An ear-splitting shriek from a maidservant.

A wide, well-lit yard that must be crossed with guards watching it from towers.

A high wall directly in the path of escape.

A barred window in the path of escape.

The rat-infested kitchens.
An imprisoned nobleman who offers to help if you help him escape.
An imprisoned thief who is bent on revenge.
d6 Even if you make it out of the dungeon, you’ll never escape because...

The castle’s huntsman will ride you down.

The castle’s hunting hounds are peerless.

The castle’s ghosts will shriek in alarm.

The knights sworn to the castle’s liege will not rest until they return you to him or her.

The castle’s archers will fill you with arrows.

You’ve been branded a prisoner of this place; no one will risk helping you.

JAILER

d6 The jailer is...

A coward who likes to act tough.

A bully in every sense of the word.

A man who grew up among criminals.

A sadistic thug.

A mild-mannered man of faith.

A resentful cripple.

d4 The jailer is concerned about...

Rumors of an upcoming escape attempt.

Losing his job after a messy prisoner death.

Facing a prisoner who creeps him out.

Ways to make a little extra silver.

d4 The jailer is looking to...

Abuse someone who is defenseless.

Make himself feel powerful.

Reach out to a disturbed prisoner.

Swap grisly tales.

d8 The jailer carries...

A large ring of keys.

A large knife and a sap.

A pale of cold porridge from the kitchens.

Loot seized from several prisoners.

A pocket-sized prayer book.

A spiked club.

A scourge or whip.

A wineskin.

PRISONER

d4 The prisoner has...

A long scraggly beard.

A patchy beard.

Skin draped loosely over his bones.

Boils and sores on his skin.

d6 The prisoner is here because...

He stole something.

He killed someone.

He raped someone.

He was caught poaching on his liege’s land.

He committed an act of fraud.

Someone confused him with someone else.

d4 The prisoner has...

No hope of escape.

A foolish optimism of his escape prospects.

A tenuous grasp on sanity.

Been driven mad.

TORTURER

d4 The torturer is...

The bastard son of a noble house.

A priest with a puritanical agenda.

A horrible sadist.

A wicked little man.

d4 The torturer is looking to...

Impress his liege with efficient confessions.

Make himself feel powerful.

Break a particularly willful prisoner.

Frighten someone with grisly tales.

d6 The torturer carries...

A large knife and a scourge.

A leatherbound set of blades, hooks, and prongs.

Several strange potions and poisons.

A trophy taken from a tortured prisoner.

A pocket-sized prayer book.

A flask of spirits.