Random Crafting Guilds: Hire the professionals...
d20 This is a guild for...

Miners.

Foresters.

Farmers.

Laborers.

Smithies.

Barbers and dentists.

Jewelers.

Fools, entertainers, and players.

Shipwrights.

Tanners, furriers, and shoemakers.

Butchers.

Locksmiths and nailsmiths.

Potters and dyers.

Saddlers, farriers, and stable masters.

Joiners, wheelwrights, and coopers.

Masons.

Weavers and tailors

Goldsmiths and watchmakers

Learned professionals (d8): 1. alchemists; 2. architects; 3. calligraphers; 4. historians; 5. lawyers and judges; 6. scribes; 7. siege engineers; 8. writers.

Special artisans and artists (d10): 1. brewers; 2. candlers; 3. chefs; 4. glassblowers; 5. historical reenactors; 6. mithrilsmiths; 7. musicians; 8. painters; 9. sculptors; 10. silversmiths.

d8 This guild's status and control is...

Poor; though once great, this guild has fallen on hard times and is struggling to maintain its power.

Brand new, and frantically recruiting members in order to snatch power.

Exponentially rising, a recent boon has granted them great profits.

Slowing, a rising competitor is slowly cutting into profits.

Absolute, they have complete dominance in their field.

Spotty, depending on the will of the coin and the market this guild may be drinking Elven wine or rotten grog.

Unquestioned, they exert complete dominance over all other guilds in the area.

Questionable, though they claim to have control, some operators have undermined it.

d8 This guild's illicit affairs comprise...

Literally nothing, they are paragons of upright morality.

Staying well within the law, if slipping on a few taxes due to ignorance, of course.

Knowing how to play the political game, they garner a few indirect favors from officials.

Guild leaders having dollar signs for eyes, and setting advantageous prices in the city.

Price floors becoming commonplace, and officials are often bribed in order to overlook some minor illicit activities.

A variety of upper-level bribes, some minor scams, and the dismay of local priests.

Rampant corruption, with large-scale bribery of various city officials and contracts with thieves’ guild and occasionally an assassin.

Pacts with devils, large-scale counterfeiting, and treasonous activities are a normal Tuesday morning for this guild.

d8 This guild's headquarters is...

The leader's or leaders' personal residence, a large manor.

The dusty basement of the city's capital hall.

A single, thin, and very tall townhouse that leans slightly into the street.

A moored ship, especially curious in landlocked cities.

An open-air pavilion centered in the city's bazaar.

Doubling as a large and prestigious bank.

An opulent demiplane hidden in a shady back-alley.

Jointly shared with all the guilds of the city, and the thieves guild lurks in the sewers below.

d6 Minor Quest: You must fetch a shipment of goods from...

The city gates, held up by a bureaucratic city official.

The nearest village, where they're caught up in some small-town superstition.

A relatively nearby city, where there a severe mix-up with the shipments.

The natural areas one would gather them, yourself, to learn the roots of your trade.

The stores of the city's banks, which must be paid off from their mortgage.

Across the room where the party receives the quest.

d6 Standard Quest: Recently the guild has lost access to raw materials or manufacturing because of...

A recent venture with a supplier, rival, or local official that has turned out bad.

A trade blockade that has to be resolved.

A thieves’ guild that is targeting the guild, but may be convinced to look somewhere else.

A master using it frivolously, you must go out to harvest a sufficient replacement amount.

A city official banning them, citing it as an immoral substance.

Spending all the coffer's stores on fulfilling a special contract or bribing officials, lacking the foresight to buy sufficient raw materials.

d6 Major Quest: The guild would like you to fetch a rare creature or material from...

The marketplace of the City of Brass.

An ancient dwarven stronghold's forges.

A quaint pasture—in the wildest parts of Arborea.

A faraway island, rumored to have cannibals and foul magicks.

A mystic mirage that manifests in a desert for twenty minutes once every century.

The Plane of Rats (or similar filthy location).

$APPRENTICE CRAFTER

d4 The apprentice is...

Bored.

Eager to learn.

Frustrated by his or her own mistakes.

Nervously looking about.

d4 The apprentice seeks someone to...

Give him some tips in the craft.

Purchase an item made by the apprentice.

Tell a tale that inspires creativity.

Sneak off for a drink and some kisses.

$ARTISAN

d6 The artisan is...

A young journeyman.

A mediocre journeyman.

A skilled journeyman.

A veteran of the craft.

A master of the craft.

An old crafter.

d8 The artisan has...

A friendly smile.

Keen eyes.

Watery eyes.

A stubborn scowl.

A dour frown.

A missing tooth.

Tired eyes.

An amused smirk.

d8 The artisan has...

A limp.

A hunchback.

Unsteady hands when they aren’t at work.

A habit of looking down.

A bulbous nose.

A burn scar on the face.

A wispy mustache.

A thick mustache.

d6 The artisan is particularly skilled at...

Crafting one particular type of item.

Identifying high quality raw materials.

Putting the finishing touches on an item.

Instructing and training apprentices.

Negotiating better prices for goods.

Maneuvering in guild politics.

d8 The artisan is looking for...

A new apprentice.

A journeyman craftsman to hire.

Rare materials.

A better set of tools.

Someone with whom to talk shop.

Someone who witnessed a recent sporting event.

Someone who is attending an upcoming sporting event.

A mug of strong ale.

d6 The artisan is carrying...

The tools of his or her trade.

Some raw materials.

A finished product.

A little coin.

A to-do list scrawled on a bit of parchment.

A set of many keys.

A pipe and some tobacco.

A flask of whisky.

d6 The artisan is...

A well-known member of the guild.

An established or up-and-coming leader in the guild.

A new member of the guild, having recently relocated from a distant land.

A quiet guildmember, who doesn’t get involved in guild politics.

On the outs with guild leadership.

A favorite of some of the guild’s leaders.

d6 The artisan dreams of...

Producing a masterwork of the craft.

Holding the reins of guild leadership.

Retiring peacefully.

Retiring rich.

Running away from it all.

A life of adventure.